Irony is a common tool used in literature to help tell a story. If you need a research paper that examines irony in a specific piece of literature, the writers at Paper Masters can explicate the tool of irony that many authors use.

Irony is a literary and rhetorical device in which a what appears on the surface is radically different from reality. Irony can be verbal, dramatic, or situational, often employing simile or sarcasm in order to emphasize disconnect. The term has roots in Greek theater, but came into English usage in the 16th century. In speech, “irony” is commonly confused and misused for the term “ironic.”
Types of Irony in Literature

Verbal irony is when a speaker makes a statement but employs language that is sharply different than the intended meaning, and is produced intentionally by the speaker. Below are some examples of irony in works of literature:

    IronyA classic example of verbal irony occurs during Mark Antony’s speech (“Friends, Romans, countrymen…”) in Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar.
    Dramatic irony involves a situation where the audience is aware of information that the characters are not. For example, in Oedipus the King, the audience is aware that Oedipus is the murderer of his father, but he is not.
    Situational irony, a modern interpretation, is a sharp discrepancy between expected results and actual results. O. Henry’s short story “The Gift of the Magi” is an example of situational irony.
    One other form of irony involves the discrepancy between historical perspective and how people viewed the events first hand. The most telling example of historical irony was how World War I became known as “the war to end all wars,” but the very seeds of World War II were planted in that conflict.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The first type of irony is verbal irony, in which a person says or does something one way, but the true meaning is the opposite. One of the first example of this irony is discovered when the main character, Winston Smith, uses the "Memory hole" to deposit things—one would think that this would be where things are remembered ("Memory"), but it’s actually an incinerator. The next example of irony comes when you learn about the departments of Government in Oceania. The Ministry of Truth is actually the maker of lies for the history books, the Ministry of Love discourages love, and the Ministry of Peace is actually quite violent. The final example of verbal Irony can be seen in the name of the leader of Oceania, "Big Brother." The concept of a big brother is one whom is older and wiser and helps the "littler siblings"—this not the case with 1984’s Big Brother. The Big Brother in this novel completely watches over every move a person makes keeping them controlled with fear.

The next type of irony is Situation irony, which is when a character or a sequence of events appears to be headed one way, but it ends up as the opposite of what was thought. One example of this is Winston’s general health. From the beginning of the book, it is shown how horrible his health is and is continually getting worse and more difficult, but as Winston gets involved with Julia then he begins a metamorphosis into a more healthy person. Another major example is the betrayal of many of the people whom Winston thought were his friends, such as Mr. Charrington and even O’Brien- -who both worked for the Thought Police.

This book is stuffed full of irony, the entire plot of the beginning would makes the reader expect one reaction and instead, the reader gets twisted the complete opposite direction at the end for surprise. George Orwell uses irony as sort of an exhibit, making it virtually the "how to write irony" novel for me. Throughout the book, all of the irony used became negative and depressing, I still thought this book made its point successfully and was an incredible novel.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
